---
Title: Restomod Day 19
Category: Building
Tags: XMods, Restomod, 3D Printing, Additive Manufacturing, Rapid Prototyping
Date: 2020-04-28
Updated: 2020-05-02
Summary: Summary
Image: img/rear_stress_compare.jpg
---

The suspension work continues! The rear design is now printed in a high-shell
configuration. This leads to (mostly) nicely aligned filament.

![Close view of the bottom filament structure]({attach}/img/IMG_5429.jpg)

The bottom appears to have printed even more nicely than the top, unfortunately
it's likely never going to be the most stressed layer.

![Close view of the top filament structure]({attach}/img/IMG_5431.jpg)

Compressing the rear design here doesn't lead to nearly as bad visual cracking
and stresses in the design. It still does appear to flex the beam through a
significant bend.

![Fully compressed rear suspension]({attach}/img/IMG_5432.jpg)

After compression, the suspension appears to relax back to a mostly flat and
level position.

![Unloaded rear suspension]({attach}/img/IMG_5433.jpg)

Taking a closer look at the suspension, there isn't too much stress damage;
however, what little there is appears to come from the outer shells meeting at a
gap in the beams. It appears to be about the same 0.2mm gap as between the beams
and the mounting hole structure.

![Close view of minimal stress damage]({attach}/img/IMG_5435.jpg)

# Slightly revised design

The latest design modified the width of the flexing beam to accommodate an
integer number of layers to reduce the gaps in the flexing portion of the
suspension. This slightly shifted where the arms are relative to the outboard
mounting point.

![Latest rear suspension design]({attach}/img/IMG_5439.jpg)

Rendered in CAD

![Latest rear suspension CAD]({attach}/img/CAD_FlexRearSuspension_2020-04-28.jpg)

To test out the new design, I repeatedly compressed the suspension through its
full range of motion.

![Fully compressed rear suspension]({attach}/img/IMG_5441.jpg)

Compared with other designs, it appears to have come out well, especially since
this got cycled about twice as much as any other design.

![Unloaded rear suspension]({attach}/img/IMG_5442.jpg)

The new design and printing scheme do leave something to be desired for gaps in
the center of the part, although that may be fixed by manually setting the
infill direction to align with the lateral axis.

![Filament structure of the latest design]({attach}/img/IMG_5444.jpg)

There are small stresses after compressing the suspension many times, but the
design appears to be much better than the original rear suspension

![Small stresses are still present]({attach}/img/IMG_5445.jpg)

There are small stresses after compressing the suspension many times, but the
design appears to be much better than the original rear suspension

![Comparing suspension stress effects]({attach}/img/rear_stress_compare.jpg)

