---
Title: Restomod Day 6
Category: Building
Tags: XMods, Ford, Mustang, Restomod
Date: 2020-04-05
Updated: 2020-04-06
Summary: The latest design has almost all of the features that I'm looking for, with support for some more interesting customization to go beyond the style of the original bumper.
---

The latest design has almost all of the features that I'm looking for, with
support for some more interesting customization to go beyond the style of the
original bumper.

![Front 3/4 view with new bumper]({attach}/img/IMG_5131.jpg)

![CAD Rendering]({attach}/img/CAD_rendering_2020-04-06.jpg)

For comparison, the new bumper deletes the turn signal indicators and exposes
the headlights. The end goal for the headlights is to replace them with LEDs,
but for now the printed rings are a compromise for testing fit before committing
to the electrical work.

![Front view comparing the new and old bumper]({attach}/img/IMG_5132.jpg)

One thing to note on this high-angle front 3/4 view is that the line of the
front bumper doesn't blend into the headlight and wheel arch as smoothly as the
original design.

![Front 3/4 view with wheels turned]({attach}/img/IMG_5129.jpg)

While the focus for this view isn't perfect, it does highlight that the
headlight geometry isn't quite aligned with the body. At the outboard side of
the headlight, the body actually slants in slightly which is not captured in the
current design. Also, comparing back to the first side by side photo, the
inboard end of the headlights should end up lining up with the sculpting on the
hood.

![Close up view of headlight design]({attach}/img/IMG_5133.jpg)

A highlight for the new design: There is plenty of clearance for the wheel to
turn to its maximum extent. This design iteration also highlighted that the
existing XMods hub design does lead to slop in the wheel, so the wheel can yaw
left and right without the hub changing position. This may need to be addressed
by adjusting the wheel/hub design or experimenting with replacing the parts
themselves.

![Close up view of front wheel arch with wheels turned in]({attach}/img/IMG_5134.jpg)

These last two images cover the suspension compression and ground clearance.
With the suspension fully compressed, there is still clearance with the updated
front bumper design.

![Close up view of front wheel arch with no compression]({attach}/img/IMG_5135.jpg)

![Close up view of front wheel arch with suspension compressed]({attach}/img/IMG_5136.jpg)

